Chapter 1: Introduction to Biology and the Process of Science Figure 1.1 This NASA image is a composite of several satellite-based views of Earth. (credit: modification of work by NASA/Concepts of Biology OpenStax) Viewed from space, Earth offers very few clues about the diversity of life forms that can be found there. The first forms of life on Earth are thought to have been microorganisms that existed for billions of years before plants and animals appeared. Mammals, birds, and flowers are all relatively recent additions to the planet, originating 130 to 200 million years ago. Humans have only inhabited this planet for the last 2.5 million years, and only in the last 200,000 years have humans started looking like we do today. 1.1 Themes and Concepts of Biology Biology is the science that studies life. What exactly is life? This may sound like a silly question with an obvious answer; however, it is not always easy to define life. For example, a branch of biology called virology studies viruses. Viruses exhibit some of the characteristics of life but lack others. It turns out that although viruses can attack living organisms, cause diseases, and even reproduce with the help of host cells, they do not meet all the criteria that biologists use to define life. From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with four questions: What are the shared properties that make something “alive”? How do those various living things function? Planet Access for free at https://openstax.org/  1 earth has a diversity of life forms; how do we organize and classify these different organisms? Finally, how did this diversity arise, and how is it continuing? As new organisms are discovered every day, biologists continue to seek answers to these and other questions. Properties of Life All living organisms share the following key characteristics: order, response to stimuli, reproduction, adaptation, growth and development, homeostasis, and energy processing. These seven characteristics serve to define life. It is essential that students know these different properties of life and be able to explain each. Order Organisms are highly organized and consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, single-celled organisms are remarkably complex. Inside each cell, atoms come together through chemical bonding and form molecules. Molecules come together to form cell components or structures called organelles. Like the toad shown in Figure 1.2, multicellular organisms can consist of millions of cells. Different groups of cells then specialize in performing specific functions.  Without order, specialization would not be possible. Response to Stimuli Figure 1.2 A toad represents a highly organized individual. (credit: "Ivengo(RUS)"/Wikimedia Commons) Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can bend toward a source of light or respond to touch (Figure 1.3). Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals, a process called chemotaxis. A movement toward a stimulus is considered a positive response, while movement away from a stimulus is regarded as a negative response. Humans also respond to stimuli. For example, when we become warm on a hot sunny day, the body has tiny glands called sudoriferous, or sweat, glands that make and release sweat onto the skin's surface. The heat from the body can be transferred to the sweat, which acts as a cooling mechanism and helps to maintain constant body temperature. Figure 1.3 The leaves of this sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) will instantly droop and fold when touched. After a few minutes, the plant returns to its normal state. (credit: Alex Lomas/Concepts of Biology OpenStax) Return to Table of Contents 2  CONCEPTS IN ACTION- Watch this video to see how the sensitive plant responds to a touch stimulus. Reproduction Reproduction is necessary on both a cellular and organismal level. For a population to survive, some individuals within that population must reproduce. Organisms that are multicellular, such as plants and animals, also need to reproduce on a cellular level. As old cells become damaged or worn out, they must be replaced by new cells. For example, skin cells are damaged continuously and need to be replaced every two to three weeks; otherwise, the skin would lose its ability to provide protection. Adaptation Single-celled organisms must also reproduce. Reproduction begins by first duplicating their genetic material. Once the genetic material is duplicated, it is then divided equally into two new cells (Figure 1.4). The two new daughter cells should be identical to the parent cell. Figure 1.4 Bacteria cell going through division. (credit: Pradana Aumars/Wikimedia Commons) All living organisms exhibit a “fit” to their environment. Biologists refer to this fit as adaptation.  Adaptations are a consequence of evolution by natural selection. Evolution has had some impact on every lineage of reproducing organisms. Examples of adaptations are diverse and unique. For example, some microorganisms live in boiling hot springs, whereas some moths have tongues the exact length of the flower from which they feed. Adaptations are vital because they enhance an individual's ability to survive and reproduce; however, adaptations are not constant. As an environment changes, natural selection causes the individuals in a population to adapt to those changes. For example, imagine that there is a population of finches living on an island. An environmental event has resulted in two main food sources: soft insects and hard seeds. Not all finches within the population have the same beak length or size. Finches in the population that have long, skinny beaks begin to feed on soft insects because they are easy for those birds to catch and eat. Finches with large, more dense beaks feed on hard seeds because their dense beaks allow them to Access for free at https://openstax.org/  3 crush and open the hard seeds. Unfortunately, finches that have beaks that are neither long nor dense may slowly begin to decline in number because they are limited in their ability to obtain nutrients. Finches that obtain food can put energy into reproduction and survival needs. When those finches reproduce, they pass along those adaptations that allow them to be successful in their respective feeding environments. Over time two distinct groups may arise, those with thick, dense beaks and those with longer skinnier beaks (Figure 1.5). If these individuals genetically change in such a way that they no longer can interbreed with one another, a speciation event will have occurred. Growth and Development Figure 1.5 Different finch phenotype variations due to environmental changes. (credit: National Human Genome Research Institute's Talking Glossary/Wikimedia Commons) Development is often described as the processes that an individual goes through as it grows and matures. For example, in humans, development begins once the sperm fertilizes the egg. Human development can be broken down into different stages including embryonic development, fetal development, infancy, childhood, puberty, and adulthood. Development can also be observed in many other organisms. For example, butterflies go through a developmental process called metamorphosis that begins at the egg stage and then proceeds to the larva, pupa, and adult stages.  Both multicellular and single-celled organisms grow and develop according to specific instructions encoded in their DNA. DNA is organized into genes that provide information for cellular growth and development. An individual's DNA ensures that a species’ young (Figure 1.6) will grow up to exhibit many of the same traits as its parents.  Figure 1.6 Although no two looks alike, these kittens have inherited genes from both parents and share many of the same characteristics. (credit: Pieter & Renée Lanser/ Concepts of Biology OpenStax) Return to Table of Contents 4  Homeostasis Even the smallest organisms are complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate internal functions, such as the transport of nutrients (Figure 1.7), response to stimuli, and coping with environmental stresses. Homeostasis or “steady state” is the ability of an organism to regulate and maintain constant internal conditions. Figure 1.7 Human circulatory system plays an important role in transporting oxygen, removal of waste, and delivering nutrients to every cell. (credit: Public domain/Wikimedia Commons) Cells require appropriate conditions such as proper temperature, pH, and concentrations of nutrients to function correctly. Although these conditions may change, organisms can maintain internal conditions within a narrow range. For example, many organisms regulate their body temperature in a process known as thermoregulation. Organisms that live in cold climates, such as the polar bear (Figure 1.8), have body structures such as thick layers of fur or fat, which help them withstand low temperatures and conserve body heat. In hot climates, plants carry out unique versions of photosynthesis to reduce water loss and optimize their potential of making sugar. a b Figure 1.8a. Polar bears and other mammals living in ice-covered regions keep their body temperature relatively constant, even though the environment can be very hot during the day and cold at night. (credit: "longhorndave"/Flickr) b. Polar bear maintain their body temperature by generating heat and reducing heat loss through thick fur and a dense layer of fat under their skin. In this infrared image the polar bear‘s body heat hardly registers; only the uninsulated eyes and mouth show temperatures significantly warmer than the environment. (credit: Arno/Coen/Wikimedia Commons) Access for free at https://openstax.org/  5 Organisms like humans (Figure 1.9), use their skeletal muscles to generate heat. The contraction of skeletal muscles helps humans maintain stable internal body temperature as environmental conditions fluctuate. If body temperature drops below a certain point, metabolism begins to slow and may even stop, leading to death. Conversely, if body temperature rises above a certain point, it can lead to the destruction of key molecules called proteins. Students that continue and take Anatomy and Physiology classes will spend time discussing how the body works to maintain homeostasis. Students will also look at what occurs when the body loses its ability to maintain stable internal conditions, otherwise referred to as a homeostatic imbalance. Energy Processing Figure 1.9 Thermogram of a snake wrapped around a human arm. (credit: Arno/Coen/Wikimedia Commons) All organisms, including the California condor shown in Figure 1.10, use a source of energy for their metabolic activities. Some organisms can obtain energy through metabolic pathways such as photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is a process where light energy can be captured and converted into chemical energy. Organisms that are capable of making their own chemical energy are referred to as autotrophs. Others must obtain their chemical energy by consuming other organisms. These individuals are referred to as heterotrophs. Regardless of whether an organism is an autotroph or a heterotroph, all living cells must have energy to drive metabolism.  Figure 1.10 A lot of energy is required for a California condor to fly. (credit: Pacific Southwest Region U.S. Fish and Wildlife/ Concepts of Biology OpenStax) Return to Table of Contents 6  Levels of Organization of Living Things Living things are highly organized and structured. The atom is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. It consists of a nucleus surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules. A molecule is a chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms held together by a chemical bond. Many biologically important molecules are macromolecules. A macromolecule is a large molecule that is typically formed by combining smaller molecules. For example, nucleotides are small molecules linked together to form the macromolecule, DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) (Figure 1.11). DNA contains the instructions necessary for cells and organisms to maintain homeostasis. Figure 1.11 A molecule, like this large DNA molecule, is composed of atoms. (credit: "Brian0918"/Wikimedia Commons) CONCEPTS IN ACTION- To see an animation of this DNA molecule, click here. Some cells contain collections of macromolecules surrounded by membranes; these are called organelles. Organelles are small structures that exist within cells and perform specialized functions. For example, in some cells, DNA is enclosed within a membrane-bound organelle called the nucleus (plural: nuclei). All living things are made of cells; the cell is the smallest fundamental unit found in living organisms. Cells exhibit all of the properties of life discussed above. Viruses are often not considered living because they are not made of cells, nor are they capable of reproducing on their own. To make new viruses, they must invade and take over a living cell. Some organisms consist of a single cell, while others are multicellular. In most multicellular organisms, cells combine to make tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out the same function. Organs are collections of tissues grouped based on a common function. Organs are present not only in animals but also in plants. An organ system is a higher level of organization that consists of functionally related organs. For example, vertebrate animals have many organ systems, such as the circulatory system that transports blood throughout the body; it includes organs such as the heart and blood vessels. Organisms are individual living entities. For example, each tree in a forest is an organism. Single-celled prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are also considered organisms and are typically referred to as microorganisms. Access for free at https://openstax.org/  7 Figure 1.12 From an atom to the entire Earth, biology examines all aspects of life. (credit "molecule": modification of work by Jane Whitney; credit "organelles": modification of work by Louisa Howard; credit "cells": modification of work by Bruce Wetzel, Harry Schaefer, National Cancer Institute; credit "tissue": modification of work by "Kilbad"/Wikimedia Commons; credit "organs": modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal, Joaquim Alves Gaspar; credit "organisms": modification of work by Peter Dutton; credit "ecosystem": modification of work by "gigi4791"/Flickr; credit "biosphere": modification of work by NASA/ Concepts of Biology OpenStax)  Return to Table of Contents 8  All the individuals living within a specific area are collectively called a population. For example, a forest may include many white pine trees. All these pine trees represent the population of white pine trees in this forest. Different populations may live in the same area. The forest with the pine trees includes populations of flowering plants, insects, and microbial populations. A community is the set of populations inhabiting a particular area. For instance, all the trees, flowers, insects, and other populations in a forest form the forest’s community. The forest itself is an ecosystem. An ecosystem consists of all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic, or non-living, parts of that environment, such as nitrogen in the soil or rainwater. At the highest level of organization (Figure 1.12), the biosphere is the collection of all ecosystems on planet Earth. It includes land, water, and portions of the atmosphere.  Answer: (b) The Diversity of Life The science of biology is very broad because there is a tremendous diversity of life on Earth. The source of this diversity is evolution. Evolution is the process of genetic change in a population. Evolution helps explain how new species can arise from older species. Speciation events can occur when individuals within a population are separated and begin to change or evolve independently of one another. If the individuals change to the point where they can no longer interbreed, a speciation event has occurred, and species diversity has increased. Evolution will be discussed in much greater detail in chapter 11. In the 18th century, a Swedish scientist named Carl Linnaeus first proposed organizing living organisms into a hierarchical taxonomy. In this system, species that are most similar to each other are put together within a grouping known as a genus. Furthermore, similar genera (the plural of genus) are put together within a family. This grouping continues until all organisms are collected together into groups at the highest level. The current taxonomic system now has eight levels in its hierarchy, from lowest to highest, they are species, genus, family, order, class, phylum, kingdom, and domain (Figure 1.13). Access for free at https://openstax.org/  9 Figure 1.13 This diagram shows the levels of taxonomic hierarchy for a dog, from the broadest category—domain—to the most specific—species. (credit: Fowler et al./Concepts of Biology OpenStax) The highest taxonomy level, domain, is a relatively new addition (1990's) to the system. Scientists now recognize three domains of life: the Eukarya, the Archaea, and the Bacteria. The domain Eukarya is very diverse and includes the kingdoms of fungi, plants, animals, and several kingdoms of protists. Humans, plants, yeast, and mushrooms are just a few representatives of the domain Eukarya. These organisms are classified as eukaryotes because they have nuclei and other membrane-bound organelles. Both the Archaea and Bacteria are single-celled organisms classified as prokaryotes (Figure 1.14). Prokaryotes are organisms that lack nuclei and other membrane-bound organelles. Prokaryotes, like eukaryotes, are very diverse and can be subdivided into phyla, class, order, etc. Figure 1.14 These images represent different domains. The scanning electron micrograph shows (a) bacterial cells belong to the domain Bacteria, while the (b) extremophiles, seen all together as colored mats in this hot spring, belong to domain Archaea. Both the (c) sunflower and (d) lion are part of the domain Eukarya. (credit a: modification of work by Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, NIH; credit b: modification of work by Steve Jurvetson; credit c: modification of work by Michael Arrighi; credit d: modification of work by Frank Vassen / Concepts of Biology OpenStax) Return to Table of Contents 10  Evolution in Action - Carl Woese and the Phylogenetic Tree The evolutionary relationships of various life forms on Earth can be summarized in a phylogenetic tree. A phylogenetic tree is a diagram showing the evolutionary relationships among biological species based on similarities and differences in genetic or physical traits or both. The pioneering research of American microbiologist Carl Woese at the University of Illinois has shown that life on Earth has evolved along three lineages, now called domains. The phylogenic tree in Figure 1.15 can be used to show the separation of living organisms into those three domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Branches of Biological Study Figure 1.15 This phylogenetic tree was constructed by microbiologist Carl Woese using genetic relationships.  (credit: modification of work by Eric Gaba/ Concepts of Biology OpenStax) The scope of biology is broad and therefore contains many branches and sub-disciplines. For instance, molecular biology studies biological processes at the molecular level, including interactions among molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins. Microbiology is the study of the structure and function of microorganisms. It is quite a broad branch itself, and depending on the subject of study, there are also microbial physiologists, ecologists, and geneticists, among others. Paleontology, another branch of biology, uses fossils to study life’s history (Figure 1.16). Zoology and botany are the study of animals and plants, respectively. Biologists can also specialize as biotechnologists, ecologists, or physiologists, to name just a few areas. Access for free at https://openstax.org/  11 Biotechnologists apply the knowledge of biology to create useful products. Ecologists study the interactions of organisms in their environments. Physiologists study the workings of cells, tissues, and organs. This is just a small sample of the many fields that exist within biology. Figure 1.16 Researchers work on excavating dinosaur fossils at a site in Castellón, Spain. (credit: Mario Modesto/ Concepts of Biology OpenStax) CAREER CONNECTION - Forensic Scientist Forensic science is the application of science to answer questions related to the law. Biologists, as well as chemists and biochemists, can be forensic scientists. Forensic scientists provide scientific evidence for use in courts, and their job involves examining trace materials associated with crimes. Interest in forensic science has increased in the last few years, possibly because of popular television shows that feature forensic scientists on the job. The development of molecular techniques and the establishment of DNA databases have updated the types of work that forensic scientists can do. Their job activities are primarily related to crimes against people, such as murder, rape, and assault. Their work involves analyzing samples such as hair, blood, and other body fluids, and processing DNA (Figure 1.17a) found in many different environments and materials. Forensic scientists also analyze biological evidence left at crime scenes, such as insect parts or pollen grains (Figure 1.17b). Students who want to pursue careers in forensic science will most likely be required to take chemistry and biology courses as well as some intensive math courses. Figure 1.17a This forensic scientist works in a DNA extraction lab. (credit: U.S. Army CID Command Public Affairs/ Concepts of Biology OpenStax) b. This scientist uses microscopy for sample analysis. (credit: National Cancer Institute /Public Domain) Return to Table of Contents 12  Section Summary Biology is the science of life. All living organisms share several key properties such as order, response to stimuli, reproduction, adaptation, growth and development, homeostasis, and energy processing. Living things are highly organized following a hierarchy that includes atoms, molecules, organelles, cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems. Organisms are grouped as populations, communities, ecosystems, and the biosphere. Evolution is the source of the tremendous biological diversity on Earth today. A diagram called a phylogenetic tree can be used to show evolutionary relationships among organisms. Biology is very broad and includes many branches and sub-disciplines. Examples include molecular biology, microbiology, neurobiology, and ecology, among others. 